# What drives complexity in human societies?
# Is human social complexity something new, fundamentally different from non-human complexity?


The main driver of complexity in human societies is the emergency of *culture*, enabled by the evolution of symbolic language.

Other species are limited to communications about their immediate surroundings while humans, thanks to symbolic language, can discuss the past, the future, abstract and theoretical concepts.

Through language, humans can accumulate and store informations through generations. For the first time, each new generation knows more than the previous one.

The ability of humans to generate new, unforseen breakthroughs in their knowledge and abilities to shape the world they live in grows with each new individual, and even more with each increase of connectivity and communication between individuals.

# List as many real-world problems as you can that relate to increasing social complexity
# How does an understanding of complexity in human societies help us to understand these problems?

Several problems can arise from the increase in social complexity.

A first class of problems relates to the sheer power that our complex society and deeply interconnected culture affords us to shape the rest of the natural world: as our tools become more powerful and the pace of their evolution more hectic, the effects on preexisting feedback loops becomes unpredictable and, as for the case of global warming, we might not be able to predict the effects of our changes to the ecosystem could have until decades later.

Other problems arise from the need to increase interconnectedness to facilitate the energy flows necessary to maintain our complexities. This can result in great, quick social reorganisations and upheavals as the world's population converges to few global cities, and different cultures and languages feel the tension between the need for integration and the fear of disappearing as distinct markers of identity.

Finally, an interconnected world of humans endowed with such huge power to modify it increases the risk of catastrophic conflicts, and new efforts in diplomacy and organisation on the global level are needed to guarantee humanity's survival.

Understanding complexity can help us face these problems by reminding us that our system is embedded in other systems, and that our actions can have unforseen consequences at different spatial and chronological scales. It can allow us to analyse the multiple pathways towards which future innovation might lead us, and to understand the effects they could have on existing feedback loops.
