- List as many breakdowns of complexity as you can remember, including examples from the non-living, living but non-human, and human realms. Consider the list you have produced. Free-write on the question: What do breakdowns of complexity across these realms share in common?

- List as many real-world problems as you can that relate to breakdowns of complexity. Consider the list you have produced. Free-write on the question: How does an understanding of the limits to complexity help us to understand these problems?

All complex systems will eventually break down. Stars will collapse when their reservoir of hydrogen runs out, collapsing into white dwarves, supernovae or black holes. The universe itself is bound to reach a uniform, low energy, maximum entropy state.

Here on Earth, we already witnessed the breakdwon of complex ecosystems, as oxygenic photosyntesis forced the most of the earlier anaerobic life forms to hide in niches without oxygen and sparked the evolutionary process that would lead to eukaryotes.

More complex species and ecosystems came and went; the sixth mass extinction, currently underway, is a result of the need for energy to fuel human societies. Our own human societies are no stranger to collapse, and the 2008 financial crisis taught us how even our economies are unpredictable, fragile complex systems, far from the idealised equilibrium model of classical economics.

If all complex system will eventually break down, the pace at which they inevitably collapse depends on the energy density they need to preserve themselves: the more complex a system, the higher the energy flows, the quicker their lifecycle.

As we start to witness breakdowns of system on a scale on which we can have an effect, it becomes paramount to understand the pathways that can lead to collapse in order to devise better solutions.

Thinking in terms of energy flows, interdependent systems, meta- and ecosystems could better guide us towards a richer, more meaningful analysis of the possible pathways these systems can take and make us more mindful of the cascade of consequences our interventions can set into motion.