List as many ways of measuring or assessing complexity in the Anthropocene as you can remember. Consider the list you have produced. Free-write on the question: Is complexity fundamentally greater (quantitatively or qualitatively) in the Anthopocene compared to earlier human social complexity?

List as many real-world problems as you can that relate to increased complexity in the Anthropocene. Consider the list you have produced. Free-write on the question: How does an understanding of complexity in the Anthropocene help us to understand these problems?

We measure the complexity of a system by measuring the energy flows required to maintain it, and my the number and diversity of its components.

The Anthropocene represents an enormous increase of complexity, both qualitatively and qualitatively.

Human population increased tenfold in the past two hundred years and in the 20th century, in the context of the Great Acceleration, human energy use increased by a factor of 16. The sheer scale and power of human activity is an entirely new phenomenon, comparable to the major geological processes of the past.

Increased complexity has, until now, always implied an increase in fragility, so it is our responsibility to understand the systems we created and find ways to stabilise it or to adapt it to the new conditions we helped arise.

Efforts to measure and improve the effect our organisations can have on the planet are underway, and the social and environmental dimensions are slowly being considered when making policy decisions, together with the traditional economic dimension (measured by benchmarks such as GDP).

Sustainability accounting system, such as the Triple Bottom Line, are a needed improvement, but we should aim towards standardised reporting on economic, environmental and social performance.

One of the main obstacles to global policy decisions is the fact that, while the effect of each Country's decision are global, the main stakeholders of national governments remain their local populations. Their interests are often misaligned with the environmental and social needs of the planet, in particular as the effects of global warming on public health and productivity will be felt in poorer, tropical areas first.

A widespread understanding of the complex systems at play in the anthropocene will help creating international agreement on measurements and benchmarks, aligning national goals, and fostering a sense of necessity for collaboration amongst the world's policymakers and their bases.